CLV

If from the heavy earth my thoughts could rise,
To seek the sun that in thy glory reigns,
Then should I find within thy gracious eyes
A sweet release from all my worldly pains.
But as the shadow follows fast the light,
So doth my grief attend upon thy grace,
And in the middle of the clearest night,
I see the distant beauty of thy face.
Then let the dial of my days run low,
And let the seasons change from gold to gray,
For in my heart the seeds of love do grow,
That shall outlive the ending of the day.
So shall thy worth in these my lines be told,
When all the world is withered and grown old.

CLVI

When I behold the mountain's haughty crest,
Gilded with fire by the departing sun,
I think how beauty in thy youth is blessed,
Before the race of weary age is run.
The silver stream that wanders through the plain,
Must lose its sweetness in the salt-sea deep,
And every pleasure pays a debt of pain,
When all our joys are folded up in sleep.
Yet thou, whose presence makes the morning bright,
Dost hold a lease that time cannot decay,
For in thy spirit lives a holy light,
That keeps the darkness of the world away.
Though cruel years may rob thee of thy prime,
Thy soul shall triumph o'er the wreck of time.

CLVII

Why should I labor with a weary pen,
To paint the wonders of thy outward show?
Thou art the marvel of the eyes of men,
A flower that in the garden of the gods doth grow.
But inward worth is more than outward fair,
And truth is richer than the finest gold;
Thy gentle soul is like the summer air,
Which keeps a sweetness that can ne'er be told.
Then let the poets of a future age,
Look on these lines and find thy image there,
For thou shalt live upon the living page,
As long as men shall breathe and find thee fair.
Thy name shall be a lamp to light the way,
When all our monuments are turned to clay.

CLVIII

Is it thy will that I should ever pine,
And waste my spirit in a sea of tears?
Or shall the glory of thy love be mine,
To calm the tempest of my coming years?
The mariner who seeks the hidden shore,
Is guided by the constant star above;
So I, through waves that round about me roar,
Am led to safety by thy perfect love.
Then let the winds of fortune blow their fill,
And let the angry clouds obscure the sky,
My soul shall be a temple, calm and still,
Wherein thy sacred image safe shall lie.
For though the world should crumble into dust,
I'll place in thee my everlasting trust.

CLIX

How many hearts have fallen in the snare,
Of painted beauty and a borrowed face!
But thou art made of substance far more rare,
And in thy truth I find a holy grace.
The rose may lose its perfume in the gale,
And lilies wither in the winter's frost,
But thy perfection never shall grow pale,
Nor shall the treasure of thy soul be lost.
For nature carved thee with a steady hand,
And gave thee all the riches of her store,
To be a pattern to a weary land,
And live in memory for evermore.
Let others boast of titles and of gold,
Thy worth is more than can be bought or sold.

CLX

When I consider how the minutes fly,
Like restless birds across a stormy sea,
I fear the time when beauty's rose must die,
And leave me nothing but the thought of thee.
But as the seed within the earth doth wait,
To spring to life when April's breath is near,
So shall thy glory find a second state,
And in a thousand different forms appear.
For thou art part of all that's good and fair,
The light of stars, the sweetness of the spring,
And while there's music in the summer air,
Thy name shall be the song the angels sing.
Then fear not time, nor death's eternal night,
For thou art made of everlasting light.

CLXI

O, let me be the mirror of thy mind,
That I may show thee all thy hidden worth!
For in thy spirit I a kingdom find,
The only paradise upon the earth.
The king who wears a crown of heavy gold,
Is but a captive to a thousand cares,
But I, who in my heart thy image hold,
Am richer than the wealthiest of heirs.
Then let the world pursue its idle gain,
And let the proud man boast of his degree,
I'll count my losses as a holy gain,
So long as I am well-beloved of thee.
For in thy love I find a sweet content,
That makes me bless the life that I have spent.

CLXII

Thy beauty is a book where I do read,
The ancient stories of a better time;
For thou art made of that celestial seed,
That flourished once in a more happy clime.
The iron age has touched the hearts of men,
And turned the garden to a barren field,
But in thy presence I am young again,
And find the comfort that thy love doth yield.
Then let me write thy praises in my verse,
That future ages may behold thy light,
And all the wonders of thy soul rehearse,
To keep thy memory from the grasp of night.
For though the world is fallen in decay,
Thy glory shall not vanish quite away.

CLXIII

Why dost thou hide the treasure of thy heart,
And keep thy love within a locked chest?
Thou art the master of a holy art,
That gives the weary spirit peace and rest.
The sun would be a burden to the sight,
If it should shine with a perpetual glare;
But thou art like the soft and gentle light,
That makes the evening and the morning fair.
Then open wide the windows of thy soul,
And let the sweetness of thy grace flow free,
For thou dost hold the power to make me whole,
And bring the wanderer home across the sea.
Thy love is like a fountain in the waste,
That gives a sweetness to the bitter taste.

CLXIV

When I behold the ruins of the past,
The broken columns and the fallen towers,
I think how nothing in this world can last,
But withers like the fragile summer flowers.
Yet there is something in thy gentle eye,
That speaks of things that never can decay,
A light that comes from a more lofty sky,
To guide us through the darkness of our way.
Then let the seasons turn their heavy wheel,
And let the years consume our mortal frame,
For time itself shall in its passage feel,
The holy power of thy sacred name.
Thy worth shall be the theme of every song,
To right the ruins of a world of wrong.

CLXV

If I should lose the music of thy voice,
Then were my ears a dungeon of despair;
For in thy speech the angels do rejoice,
And all the world is made more sweet and fair.
The lutenist may strike a silver string,
And bring a sudden moisture to the eye,
But thou art like the spirit of the spring,
Which makes the very earth and heavens sigh.
Then let me keep thy image in my heart,
As holy relics in a golden shrine,
For thou art made of that immortal art,
That makes the human nature seem divine.
And when the silence of the grave is near,
Thy name shall be the only sound I hear.

CLXVI

How can I tell the measure of my love,
When all my words are like the falling leaves?
It is a gift that comes from far above,
And for thy sake my spirit joys and grieves.
The lark that sings at the approach of day,
Is not more happy in his airy height,
Than I, when I can cast my cares away,
And lose myself within thy lovely light.
But as the day must yield to coming night,
So must my joy be tempered with a fear,
Lest time should rob me of the blessed sight,
Of all the things that I do hold so dear.
Yet in my soul thy beauty shall remain,
A sweet defiance to the world of pain.

CLXVII

Thou art the summer of my weary year,
The golden harvest of a barren field;
In thy presence I forget my fear,
And find the comfort that thy grace doth yield.
The winter wind may howl about the door,
And strip the forest of its leafy pride,
But I shall fear the tempests nevermore,
So long as thou art walking by my side.
For thou hast made a garden in my breast,
Where flowers of hope and constancy do bloom,
And in thy love my spirit finds its rest,
A safe retreat from the approaching doom.
Then let the world be frozen in its hate,
Thy love shall be my ever-gracious fate.

CLXVIII

When in the mirror of my aging face,
I see the traces of the passing years,
I think how time doth every thing deface,
And turns our laughter into bitter tears.
But then I look upon thy youthful brow,
Where beauty sits upon her ivory throne,
And I am made as young as thou art now,
By making all thy happiness my own.
For thou art like a branch of a fair tree,
That bears the blossoms of a better spring,
And in thy life I find my liberty,
From all the sorrows that the world can bring.
Thy youth shall be the ransom of my age,
And live forever on my living page.

CLXIX

Why should I seek for diamonds in the mine,
Or pearls within the caverns of the deep?
The only riches that I crave are thine,
The holy treasures that my heart doth keep.
The merchant travels to the farthest shore,
To bring back spices and the cloth of gold,
But I have found a more abundant store,
In things that never can be bought or sold.
For thy affection is a kingly prize,
More precious than the jewels of a crown,
And in the quiet of thy gracious eyes,
I see the world and all its pride go down.
Then let me be the guardian of thy grace,
The only witness of thy lovely face.

CLXX

The stars that wander through the desert night,
Are but the shadows of thy brighter fire;
For thou dost shine with a more holy light,
The only object of my soul's desire.
The moon may change her fashion every day,
And hide her face within a silver cloud,
But thy perfection never fades away,
Nor is thy glory wrapped within a shroud.
Then let me be the planet of thy sun,
And move within the circle of thy grace,
Until the race of all my days is run,
And I behold thee in a better place.
For in thy love I find my only rest,
The happy island of the ever-blessed.

CLXXI

When I consider how the world is made,
Of shifting shadows and of fleeting shows,
I am of all the future's change afraid,
And fear the end that every mortal knows.
But then I think upon thy constant heart,
Which is a rock within a stormy sea,
And I am comforted in every part,
By the great love that thou dost bear for me.
For truth is more than all the power of kings,
And love is stronger than the hand of death;
It gives a meaning to all earthly things,
And lives within the fragrance of our breath.
Then let the mountains crumble to the plain,
Thy holy faith shall evermore remain.

CLXXII

Is it a crime to love thee quite so well,
And make my heart a temple for thy sake?
For in thy presence I a heaven feel,
And from the world a long departure take.
The hermit in his cell doth pray for grace,
And seeks for comfort in a holy book,
But I can find it in thy lovely face,
And in the kindness of a single look.
Then let the world condemn me if it will,
And call my passion by a bitter name,
My soul shall be a sanctuary still,
Wherein I feed a never-dying flame.
For thou art all that's beautiful and true,
The old world's wonder and the morning's dew.

CLXXIII

When forty winters have consumed my blood,
And left me like a tree in winter's frost,
I'll think of how thy beauty was a flood,
That saved my spirit when it was most lost.
The world may forget the songs that I have sung,
And all the labors of my weary hand,
But as long as there's a voice and human tongue,
Thy name shall echo through a happy land.
For thou art made of that immortal stuff,
That neither time nor fortune can decay,
And though the road of life be dark and rough,
Thy love shall be the lamp to light my way.
Then let me close my eyes in quiet sleep,
For I have found a treasure I can keep.

CLXXIV

O, let this be the end of all my woe,
The final harbor of a restless mind!
For in thy love I everything do know,
And in thy grace I every comfort find.
The world is but a stage whereon we play,
A brief and bitter comedy of errors,
But thou hast turned the darkness into day,
And freed my spirit from its ancient terrors.
Then let the curtain fall upon the night,
And let the actors leave the empty hall,
I'll dwell forever in thy holy light,
The only thing that's real among them all.
For thou art the beginning and the end,
My sovereign, my mistress, and my friend.
